Alpacas appeared on earth first in the Northern Hemisphere and migrated across the Bering straight to where they live now, South America.
Alpacas and other camelids were the most important resources of ancient peoples in South America.
Cloth was currency to these people. A person’s social status could be easily seen in how finely woven his or her clothes were.
The Spanish Conquest almost wiped out 90% of the fine alpacas being bred by ancient cultures.
1980 was the first time alpacas were imported to the U.S. and they were all Huacayas. Suris did not arrive here until 1991.
Alpacas come in two types, Huacaya and Suri.
Alpaca gestation last about 11.5 months.
They live about twenty years.
Alpacas are ruminants and chew a cud.
Alpacas weigh between 100 and 200 pounds and stand about 36 inches at the shoulder.
Alpacas have split feet with pads on the bottom like dogs and toenails in front. The toenails must be trimmed if the ground isn’t hard enough where they are living to wear them down.
Alpacas do not have teeth in their upper palette.
Alpacas’ lower teeth have to be trimmed because they keep growing.
Alpacas are some of the most efficient eaters in nature. They won’t overeat and they can get 37% more nutrition from their food than sheep can.
Alpacas always poop in the same place. They line up to use these communal dung piles.
Alpacas hum. Some say it is from contentment but it seems to be broader than that. Humming is an outward display of emotions.
Alpacas pronk when happy. This is a sort of bouncing, all-four-feet-off-the-ground skip like a gazelle might do.
Male alpacas orgle when mating with females. This sound actually causes the female alpaca to ovulate.
An alpaca pregnancy is almost a year long.
Alpaca crias are not usually born later than 2 in the afternoon. This is because in their native habitat, it is key for them to dry off before the cold mountain night starts.
Alpacas come in at least twenty two natural colors, depending on who you ask the number goes higher. They come in more natural colors than any other animal.
Alpacas are sheared once a year to collect fiber without harm to the animal
Alpaca fiber can be carded and blended with other natural and/or synthetic fibers
Alpaca fiber can be easily dyed any color while keeping its lustrous sheen.
Alpaca fiber is versatile and uses range from fine, next-to-skin garments to upholstery and carpet.
Alpaca fiber will not burn
You can keep far more alpacas on the same amount of land then sheep because they are more efficient eaters
Because of alpacas’ foot anatomy, they disrupt soil far less than other grazers and thus create less erosion and runoff.
Alpacas are healthy grazers and do not decimate natural vegetation like goats
Alpacas can eat native grasses and don’t need you to plant a monocrop for them - no need to fertilize a special crop! Chemical use is decreased.
Alpacas do not pull up plants by the roots as cattle do. This keeps the soil intact and decreases erosion.
Alpacas weigh a lot less than other livestock like cows. Alpacas generally weigh only 100-150 pounds. Cattle weigh a thousand and compress soil far more.
A cow consumes 10% its body weight in water per day. Alpacas need just 4 to 6% per day.
Alpaca beans make excellent fertilizer and tend to defecate in only a few places in the paddock.
The scientific name for alpacas is Vicugna pacos. There are only two breeds of alpacas: Suri alpacas and Huacaya alpacas.
One visual difference between llamas and alpacas (other than their obvious size difference) is in their ears. Generally, llamas have longer, curved ears, while alpacas have shorter, straight ears.
Alpaca fiber comes in 52 natural colors, as classified in Peru. These colors range from true-black to brown-black (and everything in between), brown, white, fawn, silver-grey, rose-grey, and more.
In ancient times, alpaca fiber was known as “Fiber of the Gods” and was used to make clothing and blankets for royalty.
Just like their llama cousins, it’s unusual for alpacas to spit at humans. Usually, spitting is reserved for their interaction with other alpacas.
Despite their differences with llamas, alpacas can successfully breed with llamas, resulting in offspring known as a huarizo. These animals are usually even smaller than alpacas, but have longer fiber, which is valuable.
